# ORIE 4740: Statistical Data Mining Final Project Report Spring 2018

Abstract

In this paper,  we present our study,  analysis,  and findings of patterns in data regarding homes in Ames,Iowa.  Specifically, we use machine learning techniques to discover models that capture meaningful patternsin the data such that these patterns may be used to accurately and consistently predict the sale price ofhomes in Ames, Iowa.  This analysis not only provides an academically compelling and interesting study intothe role of home features in the residential real estate market, but also provides practical benefits.  Namely,a successful analysis and modeling effort would lead to a “smarter” real estate market in Ames as a whole.Home–buyers would know which features are the most valuable in the market, and thus would be able tomake more informed decisions regarding what constitutes a fair price for their choices.  Home–owners lookingto sell would also benefit, as with this information, they would be able to make smarter and more accurateevaluations of their homes.  We first process and clean the data so that missing and unnecessary data andother such inadequacies of the data are dealt with accordingly.  Next, we fit several different models thatattempt to capture the underlying relationship between the sale price of a home and a myriad of predictorfeature variables describing the home,  ranging from number of fireplaces to Masonry Veneer type.  Thesemodels are linear regression with backward stepwise selection, LASSO regression, and a boosting tree model.We compare the models’ performance using cross validation and other techniques, and find that boostingtrees is the best model.  We conclude that this model is the most meaningful and useful in predicting saleprice of homes in Ames, Iowa based on home features, and suggest its consideration in future endeavors topredict home sale price.
